<!--
.. title: Why do people hate Launchpad so much?
.. date: 2011/03/05 13:37
.. slug: why-do-people-hate-launchpad-so-much-
.. link:
.. description:
.. tags: 
-->

Following a discussing on Convore recently, I noticed some people (names withheld to protect the guilty -- I&#39;m sure they will speak up if they feel like it) strongly dislike Launchpad. Apparently they dislike it so much they would rather use a different project if they find something that uses it.<p /> I don&#39;t get it.<p />First off, lI&#39;m not trying to make this a git vs hg vs bzr vs whatever discussion, except perhaps to the extent that those tools shape their respective hosting system. Not that I think those discussions have to devolve into religious wars (<a href="http://b.lvh.cc/religious-wars-considered-harmful-considered">a subject on which I have blogged recently</a>), it&#39;s just that I&#39;d like to limit the scope so we end with a bunch of things that can actually be improved.<p /> My main problem with <a href="https://github.com/">the 500lb gorilla in the room</a> is its issue tracker. I know, it&#39;s a simple feature tacked on later, and all in all the ability to link to branches and revisions and to be able to close tickets from commit messages ain&#39;t so bad.<p /> One particular unfortunate choice is that they decided to make pull requests issue tracker artifacts. I&#39;m convinced it should be an attachment to one, instead. Pull requests are about merging code. There must be a reason to do that -- that reason is a ticket. That means if you use pull requests as a mechanism for code review (which they seem to be marketed as), ergo having all code be added using them, all changes to trunk have at least two issue tracker artifacts: the ticket describing the change, and the pull request carrying the code that does it. I think that&#39;s a bit silly. Pull requests hence often become somewhat of a ticket in their own right, which works well for one-time contributions which are typically limited in scope, but it seems this results in an inconsistent workflow which is a bit more annoying for things that actually do require a ticket.<p /> Launchpad&#39;s issue tracker, on the other hand, is one I particularly like.<p />It&#39;s unique in the sense that it lets you track the state of bugs in different parts of downstream. Additionally, bugs aren&#39;t unique to a project -- allowing people from different groups to collaborate on the same issue. It lets me assign bugs to a person: a feature I sorely miss in Github. The equivalent of Github Issue&#39;s voting feature is just a &quot;this affects me&quot; link: similar to Google Code&#39;s starring idea. The goal is always the same: measure the importance of a bug without getting the noise of a million &quot;me, too&quot; messages. (Github and Launchpad&#39;s way of doing it seems more effective, though.)<p /> Launchpad&#39;s alternative to pull requests, called merge proposals, are quite similar to Github&#39;s pull requests 2.0. The main difference is the bug tracker interaction: like I&#39;ve described above, they <i>attach</i> to issues, instead of being them themselves.<p /> A complain I often hear yet don&#39;t quite grok is the apparent difficulty of getting to code. Personally, I don&#39;t quite see the problem. The main branch (lp:projectname) and its contents are one click away from the front page. All of the branches of a project (from everyone! not just the project leads), are visible with a single click from the project front page, under the &quot;Code&quot; menu. I must admit I rarely use that web UI: instead, I just bzr co lp:projectname if I want to take a look.<p /> The contributor story is also fairly pleasant, in my opinion. I don&#39;t even need to fork anything (at least not explicitly): just get the branch, make some changes, push them to lp:~lvh/projectname/mybranch and done. That magic syntax isn&#39;t Launchpad-specific: that&#39;s called <a href="https://code.launchpad.net/bzr-bookmarks">a bookmark</a>, and you can just as well have your own if you don&#39;t use Launchpad.<p /> So what exactly is the problem? I&#39;m planning on moving a project from Fossil to something else at Pycon -- but if everyone hates it so much, I&#39;m willing to reconsider. For example: I&#39;d use Github if I can find a useful issue tracker to go with it. I&#39;d use bitbucket if there&#39;s some reasonable way to have in-repo pull requests (like Github pull requests 2.0 or Launchpad merge proposals).
