<!--
.. title: On sysadmins, programmers, and reconciliation (a response to Zed Shaw's post)
.. date: 2011/03/08 13:37
.. slug: on-sysadmins-programmers-and-reconciliation-a-response-to-zed-shaw-s-post-
.. link:
.. description:
.. tags: 
-->

Zed Shaw posted <a href="http://sheddingbikes.com/posts/1299555462.html">a response</a> to <a href="http://b.lvh.cc/why-do-people-hate-launchpad-so-much">my article on why people hate Launchpad</a>. Apart from causing the number of readers to skyrocket by an order of magnitude, it&#39;s given me some new perspective on the problem. As always, I love feedback, especially if people agree with things I say ;-)<p /> Assuming Zed&#39;s right (and I think he&#39;s at the very least got a point), <a href="http://b.lvh.cc/a-compiled-list-of-launchpads-perceived-flaws">my previous list of grievances</a> splits up into two things:<br /> <ol> <li>Things that make Launchpad more like Github. In Zed&#39;s terminology, make Launchpad less of a sysadmin place and more of a programmer place. Following Zed&#39;s conclusion, these are bad changes.<br /></li><li>Things that make everyone&#39;s life easier and aren&#39;t necessarily about one group versus the other. As the contrapositive to Zed&#39;s conclusion, they are good changes.<br /> </li></ol>Now, I think at least some of the UI changes from that list are in that last group. Particularly the code browser UI issues (and they are legion -- Loggerhead is on occasion hard to like) are something I don&#39;t really see how anyone could object to. Concrete examples are:<br /> <ul><li>Renaming &quot;View branch content&quot; to &quot;View code&quot;. &quot;Code&quot; is a word programmers scan for. To quote Zed&#39;s article: code, code, code. Contrary to popular belief you can actually access trunk&#39;s code with a single click from the project&#39;s front page! It&#39;s just cleverly hidden.<br /> </li><li>Merging the branch and branch content pages, embedding Loggerhead in the page like Github&#39;s file browser, instead of making it a separate page. Sysadminny types probably wouldn&#39;t ever have looked at that page in the first place.</li> <li>Removing dead project features (like translations, blueprints, answers) for J. Random User</li></ul>There are, of course, also ideas that would piss off the syadminny group, like moving series around or putting a Github style code browser on the overview page. (Probably explains why I dislike that last feature.)<p /> But yeah: if you fixed every single point in that list of perceived flaws, my in-brain mockup of what Launchpad 2.0 would look like would still decidedly be Launchpad and not Github: which is probably what Zed is talking about. And, like he said, that doesn&#39;t actually have to be problem.<p /> I agree that both Github and Launchpad would be very hard-pressed to transform into something everyone likes, but the &quot;why&quot; of that wasn&#39;t quite clear enough in my head yet for me to write a blog post about it (my posts are bad enough when I&#39;m convinced I do know what I want to say). Zed&#39;s article helped quite a bit there.<p /> The difference is I have no idea what this third system that caters to both in the same place would look like yet. Zed probably has a better idea of what he&#39;s talking about than I do.<p />My idea is different. It&#39;s probably a bit worse, since you&#39;d have N places where code live instead of 1, but at least in the short run it seems like less effort to end up with a working thing. The idea goes like this: if Github and Launchpad are really different beasts catering to different beasts, maybe we shouldn&#39;t try to make them be the same, and instead let them cooperate. This is why I think (well, hope) the idea of <a href="http://b.lvh.cc/bridging-the-gap-between-launchpad-and-github">bridging Launchpad and Github</a> -- having them play nicely together in the same sandbox instead of the current situation we&#39;re they&#39;re direct competitors -- may have some value to it.<p /> I&#39;d really like some feedback on Github fans on that. I <i>know</i> Launchpad people are going to like it since they can pretty much just use Launchpad and don&#39;t have to care Github exists. I&#39;m hoping people don&#39;t find Launchpad so revolting that using its bug tracker and merge proposals (as cited in that article I linked, features at least as good on Launchpad as on Github) becomes a contribution blocker.<p /> cheers<br />lvh
